Most fur shops were small, would run out of work often, and then the men would be laid off. The bigger shops had more work and paid better, but most of them were unionized. In the spring of 1923 I went to the Fur Workers' Union to join up. To my amazement I was curtly informed the union was not accepting any new members, that the union already had more members than there were jobs in union shops.

An intuitive flash illuminated to me the flaw in the logic of that policy, and I was ignorant enough to call that helpfully to the attention of the business agent who had rejected my application. I began to explain to him that if they would let all of us nonunion workers join, there would be more union shops, in fact all shops would be union then.

He wouldn't hear me out. "Are you going to tell me how to run this union?" he roared. "Gerrare here, you scab, before I break your neck!" He rose from his chair angrily, a big beefy man with a thick bull neck, his hands balled into a menacing fist.

I did not tarry. Although logic was unquestionably on my side he had the more powerful argument. I was puzzled by the union's attitude. I couldn't see how leaders of a trade union organization could miss such an essential point in deductive reasoning. I was too ignorant to know that they were way ahead of me in a higher, more practical form of logic—that they were collecting money from the owners of the nonunion shops to leave their workers unorganized.

I did manage to join that union though, less than a year later. Another fur worker with whom I became friendly "fixed it up" for me, and with that very same business agent, to boot. He took me downtown and told him I was a pal of his, an OK guy, not the kind of a bird who mixed into politics. The business agent was friendly, he even shook hands and promised to take me in, but it would cost me two hundred and fifty bucks "to fix it." That was steep, but I did not protest. I handed him fifty dollars, all I had, and promised him fifty more every other week. It was tough to squeeze that much out of my weekly pay of thirty-five dollars and I had to go back to taking my lunches at Max's Busy Bee. When I made my final payment the business agent took me to another office, had a girl make out my union card, then handed me a receipt.

I had made it—I was finally a union man.

The receipt was for ninety-nine dollars.

<p style="margin-top:4em;"></p>

Union shops paid better, and we were making more money even though we had to kick some of it back to the business agent; the shop chairman did the collecting.

In some of the shops I met a few so-called "left wingers" who were fighting the existing union leadership, accusing them of corruption. One of them once persuaded me to attend a union meeting in Cooper Union which he claimed would call for a showdown vote with the "right wingers." The leader of the left wingers was Ben Gold, a slender, nice-looking young fellow.

The moment I entered the hall, I sensed a great deal of tension. No sooner did the meeting open than a left winger rose to ask for the floor. A couple of men rushed up the aisles and grabbed him while his supporters jumped up on their seats, shouting and yelling in protest. The speaker, who by then was being dragged toward the exit, was digging his heels in, trying to resist, when my business agent rushed over, hauled off and punched him square in the face. That started a free-for-all on the floor. Others leaped up and started to swing at each other. But amazingly most of the members remained in their seats, watching the fight impassively.

I got excited. I was seated on the balcony and started to yell, "Don't hit him! Leave him alone!" when the two men next to me suddenly pulled me back to my seat, a third one reached over from the back and clapped his hand over my mouth, hard. They warned me to shut up or I'd get it, then demanded to see my union card and asked my name. By then I knew better. I    gave them a false name, told them my shop chairman had taken my union card to have the dues stamp put into it, and gave them a wrong shop as my place of work. I also denied knowing any of the men who started the row, which was true, and gave as my reason for yelling that I had become excited. Since none of them had seen me before nor could anyone around me identify me, they let go my arms but watched me suspiciously throughout the meeting. After the left wingers were cleared out one union official made a long speech in English, followed by another official who spoke in Yiddish, but I didn't catch anything of what was being said. That closed the meeting. No vote had been taken.

I attended only one more union meeting after that. By that time the left wingers with Ben Gold were in control of the union and they made attendance at that meeting compulsory under threat of a fine. As it turned out, that meeting was in honor of Benjamin Gitlow, the leader of the Communist Party I was told, who had just been released from jail. I was surprised at that information. I had not known we had Communists in America; I thought Communism was confined to Europe and China alone. Gitlow was greeted by thunderous applause. He made quite a long speech but I was not attuned to politics and it made no impression on me.

Shortly after that meeting I obtained a job as a foreman and since foremen did not have to belong to the union, I quit—I was fed up with being bossed around and was glad to wash my hands of that gang.
