---
title: Chapter 17
---

I didn't do much "roaring" in the early twenties. Those years were spent in groping after knowledge, perfecting my English, taking courses in theater, aspiring to become a playwright.

In those years, my life in America was the isolated existence of the uprooted immigrants who had lost their old environment and were unable to find the right new relationships to substitute for it.

Working during the day, reading, studying, writing by night, gave me no opportunity to meet people with whom I could exchange ideas and discuss the rich manifestations of life around me. I felt very lonely, as if separated by an invisible wall from the teeming population around me. Those were also womanless days. I recall those aching Saturday and Sunday evenings when, having spent my day writing at my desk, I would walk the deserted dark streets downtown desperately longing for companionship, welcoming even the query of an occasional lost passer-by seeking direction. Sometimes entire week ends would pass without my having uttered a single sentence, eating my meals in the Automat, picking up newspapers and cigarettes at the corner stand, tendering my money and receiving my change without a word exchanged. Those bleak anchorite week ends are still etched in my memory. The following Mondays in the shop my vocal cords would feel strangely constricted when forcing out the first words.

Innocent as I was about politics I nevertheless began to observe some ugly cracks in the façade of democracy. The corruption of the Harding administration, the lynchings and floggings by the Ku Klux Klan in the South, the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti, two harmless Italian anarchists clumsily framed for murder, made me realize that everything was not milk and honey in God's own country, either.

As my skill in the trade increased, so did my earning power. By 1927 I was a foreman and making good money. I moved out of my furnished room and rented a four-room railroad flat in an old brownstone house in Greenwich Village, back of Loew's Sheridan Theater. I furnished it comfortably in a Japanese motif—which was the cheapest—with mats, lanterns, Japanese prints, and a huge Japanese paper umbrella hanging from the ceiling for atmosphere; and with two wide beds, for hospitality. Company was no longer a problem, particularly as the news spread in the neighborhood that that well-heeled Hunkie usually had a supply of bootleg liquor on hand. No more lonely Saturday and Sunday nights for me; week ends I always had some kind of a party going on. Gin was seventy-five cents a bottle delivered, five bottles for three dollars. Usually I bought the five bottles where three would more than do, and woke up with a bigger hangover for a dividend.

I met people, a multitude of people, the type of people I had longed to meet—writers, artists, poets, philosophers. I even met the kind I had not wanted to meet.

Life became gay, with company ever present and I enjoyed it to the full, until one night I suddenly looked around and inspected everyone in that crowded apartment. Every nook and corner was filled, people were even perched on the radiators, window sills, on top of the piano, or just sprawling on the floor.

That sight was sobering. Not a single one of those present did any actual creative work to my knowledge. The writers did not write, the artists did not paint, the poets would redeclaim the same few lines they had composed ages ago. I couldn't recall a single instance where I had succeeded in holding a worthwhile discussion with any of them on any serious literary or artistic subject. They were forever talking about their need to express themselves, yet never did a thing about it. Only the girls who were flocking to the Village from all parts of the country managed to approach that goal. Once they discovered what their best medium of expression was—usually a couch—they expressed themselves well, and often.

In all that crowd I was the only one who actually did write, who turned out a play a year. Yet these people were acting patronizingly toward me because I was holding down a job at the same time. They considered me bourgeois! It was a revealing moment. I took my remaining two bottles of gin, poured them into the sink, and declared the party over. That caused quite a fight until the police came and took a wagonload of my guests away. The place was left in shambles and I emerged considerably bruised in flesh but free in spirit. I moved to Lexington Avenue, thus ending that Bohemian phase of my life.

However, life in Greenwich Village did have one positive aspect—it speeded up the process of my Americanization. It had brought me into intimate contact with native Americans from all parts of the country who, outside of an occasional crack at my thick Hungarian accent, never made me feel inferior because of my foreign birth. By accepting me as an equal they helped me to become an American myself, proud of my country, cherishing our traditions.

The "land where my fathers died" has ever since been America to me.
