---
title: Chapter 41
---

We didn't see much of Toulouse. The Popular Front government of France had issued new orders for strict enforcement of the Non-Intervention Policy and reinforced the border guards and patrols. We were warned to stay under cover lest our presence be betrayed by informers, and we spent almost a week cooped up, confined to our little room in a shabby house in the workers' district.

Late afternoon on the sixth day we were suddenly alerted, we would leave by taxi as soon as it turned dark. The cab picked us up around seven that evening; I do not recall the date, it was late in May.

We drove for nearly two hours, out into the country. We were following three other cabs and another was following us—five cabs in all. Van, the sailor and I were riding in one cab with two other men we had picked up. They did not speak English. I judged them to be Poles but they wouldn't respond to my questions. They talked in whispers and acted furtively, as if the police were right after them. Later I learned they were indeed Poles who had come from the Soviet Union. Suspicion had been practically bred into them, they didn't seem to trust even each other.

The ground was beginning to rise, and by the second hour of our ride we were high up in the mountains. Our driver had lost his earlier tenseness, he was relaxed and whistling, he told us the <em>Salats</em> had long been left behind and that the first danger zone had been passed. The car was steadily ascending, we noted with satisfaction—the higher the cab took us the less climbing we would have to do.

Finally the cars came to a halt and we debarked. The stars were out but no moon, the night was dark, cold, and damp. Two Frenchmen from the lead car distributed two paper bags to each of us. One contained a loaf of French bread split in the middle for a sandwich, smeared with some sort of a pate as a filler. The other held two bottles of wine—our ration for the trip. A guide materialized from the darkness. He had been waiting on the mountain just above the road; he now descended and joined us. He carried a homemade peasant pack on his back the shape of a small lamb. He held a staff in his hand, his legs were encased in rolled wool puttees. There were no ceremonies and no farewells. We were told by one of the Frenchmen that this was our guide; the cabs then turned and left.

We stood huddled close, watching the lights of the cars until they disappeared around a curve. There was little attempt at conversation; everyone was wrapped in his own thoughts. The mountainside loomed dark and steep, the air was cold and windy, more like February than May, which made us shiver; we weren't dressed for it. I was dressed warmer than most, I had a stout pair of walking shoes, double-soled and waterproofed, that I'd had the foresight to buy at Abercrombie and Fitch in New York. I told them I was going to Africa and wanted shoes that would not look like hunting or military boots yet gave the same service, and they came through handsomely. I was to have numerous occasions to bless both Mr. Abercrombie and Mr. Fitch for those shoes—I doubt I would have come out alive without them.

I had been told in Paris and also in Toulouse to abandon those shoes because they might arouse suspicion, they looked far too stout for ordinary street wear. But I was adamant. I had also been told to leave behind my heavy hand-knit camel's hair sweater which a girl in London had presented to me and which looked incongruous in France at that time of year. I hung on to that sweater, too, but I took to wearing it under my shirt. My socks were also hand-knit of heavy camel's hair. Those socks and sweater and shoes saw me through the whole civil war. I wore them summer and winter until the socks stood up by themselves stiff as boots, and the sweater became part of my skin. A pair of woolen trousers and a tweed jacket completed my apparel, topped off by a gabardine raincoat I had bought in New York which soon turned out to be neither waterproof nor wool. I counted seventeen men in the group aside from the guide, all shivering in their light spring clothes. The guide suddenly disappeared in the dark and we stood there feeling abandoned among the rocks and scrub a million miles from civilization. That was the first taste of the future that lay ahead of us and it was foreboding.

The guide reappeared as suddenly as he had vanished. He counted us with his fingers, hitched up his pack with a fling of his shoulders, and uttered just one word:

<em>"Vamos!"</em>

With that he turned and began walking up the mountainside. The pace he set was very brisk. The mountain was steep, there was no trail, and we soon found ourselves panting. We pleaded with the guide to slow down. He was a Basque and spoke very little French. He shook his head and made us understand that we had to get above the patrol zone before midnight to avoid detection and capture.

We kept on climbing grimly in single file, stumbling and breathing hard. I fell behind from the center and had to walk ever faster to keep up with the column; the man behind me was already half trotting. I summoned up all my energy and with the blood pounding in my temples managed to make my way near the head of the column. My lungs were about to burst but I knew I had to do it—the closer to the guide, the more even the pace would be. The mountain was getting very steep and it was becoming more difficult to walk upright. I watched the guide's step. He was walking with his feet pointed side ways like a man climbing a tree. I tried it and it helped to give me a better footing but I was still stumbling from time to time.

My breath was beginning to come in soblike gasps, my knees were beginning to tremble. I threw away my two bottles of wine to leave my hands free, which helped. We were way past the timber line but low scrub still grew here and there. I grabbed at it whenever I could and pulled myself on. My hands were getting scratched and bruised but I paid no heed. I was no longer a reasoning human being, I had turned into a hulk fighting for air with seared lungs and throbbing temples, with a blind stubborn will to lift a leg, to reach out a hand and grab and pull and put another leg forward.

The guide stopped abruptly and held up his staff. We all halted. I was dazed, my mind was numb, it took me seconds to realize we weren't moving and that my lungs did not ache so much. Lights were bobbing hundreds of feet below us in the dark—the border patrol!

We pulled into the shadow of a protruding rock and waited. We couldn't sit down, we were on the edge of the snow line and the ground was wet with melting snow. We leaned against the damp rock and rested. It was a few minutes past eleven, high time to eat. I pulled the sandwich out of my pocket. It tasted sour. The pate smelled bad and tasted spoiled. I scraped it off and ate the bread. It would have been nice to wash it off with wine for I was very thirsty but I had thrown the wine away. I soon found that all of us had done likewise except the guide. He had not only held on to his own bottles but also managed to pick up a few additional ones which we had thrown away. He now passed those bottles around in obvious disgust at our softness. It wasn't much of a wine, water would have been more appreciated.

After about twenty minutes we moved on. The guide was obviously frightened. He warned us not to make any noise and then he struck out, setting a stiffer pace than before. The ground was now sodden and streaked with rivulets from the melting snow. I stuck close to the guide. He avoided those freshets nimbly but I found that too exhausting and waded right through them. They were shallow and barely came up to my ankles.

My boots were waterproof and my feet felt warm. I was lucky indeed in that—a number of the others complained that their shoes were getting soaked and their feet were freezing.

We labored on and soon I was out of breath again. We pleaded with the guide to slacken the tempo but he shook his head and climbed relentlessly on. Inside my chest a fiery iron band was crushing my lungs and the pressure tightened with every breath I drew. My eyes were beginning to swell and an artery behind my ear started throbbing with the roar of a subway train. I walked and stumbled and scrambled and crawled on and on, ever on, clutching for a root, a branch, a tuft of sod, then an other, then another, seeing nothing but the feet of the guide rising, then falling, then rising again. I was stumbling and falling behind, there was a different foot rising ahead of me now, then still a different one, then nothing! All I saw was something to grab onto and pull, crawl and pull.

I was stumbling on in an eternal pitch-black void, crawling through an endless tunnel in a semiconscious state. Existence had narrowed down to sucking in air that wouldn't draw, to a numb pull of the arms, to diving forward into space. There was no aim, no purpose, no thought, no will, only the instinct to drag on and on.

The guide stopped, turned around, motioned us to halt, and sat down. I sank to the ground where I was and lay there in torpor. Slowly, very slowly, conscious thought returned. I found myself stretched on my back with my eyes fixed on the Little Dipper. It was very bright and so close I was sure I could reach up and touch the handle had I the energy. Little by little I became aware that water was trickling by my ears and that my head and shoulders were half submerged in a freshet. The water was icy cold and I was getting soaked to the skin. That might lead to pneumonia, I noted with detachment. The seat of my pants felt damp but not wet and I saw that my legs were on hIgher ground: I ought to move the rest of my body up there! It was a simple problem in locomotion, so simple I saw it in a diagram, my body sketched in heavy black lines where it actually lay, with pointed dots showing where it ought to be. The pointed dots showed my torso lifted from the waist up and then turned to the right, a most elementary procedure. I studied the problem abstractly yet I made no move. The fear of catching pneumonia was nudging me, yet I had no inclination to budge. I wondered what time it was but the image of lifting my wrist and consulting my watch remained in dotted outline. All I had to do was to will it, I knew, but there was no will to my body, only dulled sensations and vague thoughts remotely detached. Here I was, I observed idly, an inert hulk of flesh, reduced by extreme physical exertion in a short span of two hours, more or less, to the point of utter indifference to my fate. I wondered would I move if someone were trying to stab me. I proceeded to conjure up the sight—even the dagger descending—and concluded that not even that would stir me. (That picture of utter exhaustion comes to my mind every time I read accounts of Fascist torture or of Communist brainwashing. A man's body can be so broken by physical exhaustion that it becomes utterly separated from his will.)

We continued climbing all through the night, and daybreak found us up in the snow belt. We halted then for a long rest. We were beyond danger from the French border guards. We were in a land where few feet ever trod, a land of crags and snow-covered peaks that bore no sign of vegetation, birds, or animals. We were in a zone where creation had stopped and frozen in the process, where silence was so deep that it blared and made the ears ring.

Suddenly the guide sprang to his feet in great alarm. He asked us to stand up and took a rapid count. There were only sixteen of us. One comrade was missing, a German. No one knew when and how he had disappeared and we were agitated and concerned. The guide told us to wait for him and started down in search. He was gone for more than an hour. When he returned he was tired and weary. He had found no trace of the missing man. The guide said we must push on, that further search was useless. Waiting for him was futile, the German could never make his way up here and find us, waiting would endanger our own safety. We stirred uneasily. That comrade must be lying somewhere with broken bones, perhaps in pain, alone with his God whom he had disowned, his faith pinned on the international solidarity of the revolutionary working class, trusting us to come to his rescue. If we moved on and abandoned him we would be betraying everything he had worked for, everything be believed in, everything that had led him this far to join the fight against Fascism in Spain. It was worse than that. It would be a betrayal of everything we ourselves believed in, everything that had brought us here.

The guide urged us impatiently to start moving. Now one of those two Poles who had ridden with us in our cab spoke up. He was the shorter and older of the two and addressed us in poor German. He spoke incisively, he was used to making decisions.

"That comrade came to fight Fascism. He is lost to us now, one comrade less to fight Hitler and Mussolini. If we stay on and look for him we will all be lost. None of us will be left to fight Fascism. This is war. In war there is no room for sentimentalism. We must move on."

Those were frank words and brutal. All of us were of the same mind but none of us had wanted to voice it. When that Pole (obviously a high party official, judging by the deference with which the other Pole treated him) had put into words what we were hesitant to advance, not because of sympathy for that lost comrade but out of petty-bourgeois sentimental squeamishness, we felt ashamed. None of us had known the lost comrade long enough to feel sorry for him as a person. Ours was an abstract sympathy, a vestige of our upbringing, a product of a civilization shaped by religious concepts, a call of conscience that made it a duty to help other humans in distress. In all truth we were angry at him for putting us into such an embarrassing position, this made us feel guilty, and we hated him so much the more for it. That Polish comrade had taken the responsibility for resolving the issue for us the way we wished it to be resolved, he took the initiative to rationalize it for us and thereby soothe our conscience.

This was war. We were no longer civilians. In war there will be casualties! We moved on with one accord.

The light of day made climbing somewhat easier; we could at least see where to put our feet down. We were climbing over a snow field now, conquering peak after peak with bursts of desperate exertion only to find that we must descend to climb even higher ones ahead.

Van and I were the oldest in that group. I was one month short of 37, Van was somewhat older. His seafaring life had kept him in condition while my sedentary life had softened me. He and the sailor seemed to have shown the least exhaustion during that grueling climb. By midmorning I recovered my second wind and my knees were no longer rubbery. I was still laboring for breath and my heart was still pounding hard but there was a regularity to both. As we pushed on my physical condition continued to improve and I was no longer among those who kept clamoring for a rest. We had no food and we were gripped by hunger; we ate snow which helped a bit, but only momentarily, yet we kept trudging on without a single voice of complaint. The majestic beauty of those snow-capped, crazy-angled, fantastically odd-shaped peaks which had awed us when revealed by the first rosy rays of the rising sun, were long wasted on us. As the day wore on we reverted to apathy, plodding on endlessly with no sensation other than the painful contractions of our empty stomachs, the agonizing pain of each searing breath, the stabbing glare of white snow on our in flamed eyeballs.

Late that afternoon we came to a small clearing on a snow free level patch enclosed on three sides by a waist-high, crumbling adobe wall. That wall had been built by human hands for the protection of sheep and, primitive as it was, it raised our morale it represented civilization. We saw firewood around and the guide decided to spend the night there. He said we were now only about six hours' climb from our destination but the route was too hazardous to risk at night.

We built a big fire—our first chance to warm up. There was no joking or conversation around that campfire, each of us was too worn out to be concerned about the others. I felt utterly weary, my mind empty of coherent thought. My eyes idly followed the flickering flames struggling to get a bite on that wet and smoky wood, feeling their way tentatively along the damp bark for some choice and tempting morsel, retreating when rebuffed in a puff of smoke only to charge in with a rush and take a big bite, crackling with savage glee when closing down their jaws. Then I smiled because I recognized I was seeing symbols of eating and food in those flames. I stood up to survey the group.

A number of the comrades seemed to be in acute distress. Most of them had trouble with their feet. The foot of the older Pole was a mass of raw blisters, his breath came in sobs as his friend carefully attempted to pull his tattered rayon hose off the bleed ing raw skin., His shoes were tramped out of shape and soaked through from wading in the snow all day. Most of the others were also plagued by blisters and swollen feet. I took off my shoes, they were dry inside. I pulled off my socks, my feet were fine and warm—not a sign of a blister, only a reddish sensitive area around my big toes and joints where I had been frost bitten during my long ride home in an unheated boxcar from Siofok, after the Károlyi revolution.

I was about to doze off when I heard a commotion. We had a visitor, an Andorran shepherd who mysteriously appeared in our midst. The guide and he held an agitated conversation and then we were told the bad news. We had to go on at once. The French border patrol which had a treaty right to enter the Republic of Andorra had received news of us—they were pushing up in force to capture us.

We moved on with difficulty. Many in the group had to struggle painfully to get their shoes on again over their raw and swollen feet and we had to wait for them.

That night's climb was a repetition of the first. I was soon in a daze, following in the footsteps of the man ahead of me, keeping my head down.

Before dawn a loud scream followed by hoarse shouts jarred us out of our lethargy. One of the Poles, the one who was the leader, had missed his footing and disappeared. We halted in our tracks on the narrow ledge, fearful to make a move, until daybreak, when there was enough light for the guide to risk the descent into the steep abyss. The other Pole wanted to go with him but the guide refused, he went alone. The Pole tried to follow him, then he also fell in peril of skidding down. He lay there a while and then climbed back painfully, sideways, on his stomach.

The guide was gone for about two hours. When he appeared he shook his head and wouldn't say anything no matter how hard we pumped him. The remaining Pole was a statue of grief. I went over to him and put my hands on his shoulder, murmuring a few sympathetic words, but he wouldn't be consoled; he wrenched his shoulder away and spat a few angry Polish words at me.

When the guide rose to his feet we needed no one to make a speech. We all rose silently and started off. This was war and we were getting used to it.

Early afternoon of that second day we made a long descent, into a valley, then came across a dirt road leading upward. It was a narrow road, just wide enough for a cart, but it was a road and our spirits rose as we trudged along, our fatigue compensated by the sensation of walking upright again wIthout caring where we placed our feet. Presently we came to a few
adobe huts. They were low, the size of a small garage, windowless, with a roughly hewn wooden door for entrance. The guide went inside one of them and soon came out followed by  man in peasant garb. He wore close-fitting black pants with his legs wrapped in cloth to his knees, rope-soled shoes: a faded green woolen blouse with a wide blue sash wound tight around his midriff, and a black beret. He was short, built like a boy, his face was tanned by weather into deep wrinkles.

Soon about eight or ten others came out of their huts, undersized men and women, but curiously only one child. They looked at us silently. The guide was talking with them, asking for food. They shook their heads, they did not have any. Finally they brought forth a small flat round cheese and two flat, hard breads, all they could spare. They were Andorrans living at the highest inhabited place in their republic. We were the first foreigners they had seen in their lives—they had no conception of America, Germany, or the other countries we came from. They spoke a patois of mixed Spanish and Catalan, with a few distorted French words thrown in. The guide asked them to search for the people we had lost, they listened solemnly, and I couldn't tell from their impassive faces whether they really would: I doubted it, they showed no reaction when the guide explained what had happened and described with much waving of his arms the whereabouts of those accidents.

We thought we were near the end of our trail, but that proved an illusion. To avoid the border patrol that was hunting us we had skirted clear across the border into Andorra; in consequence we now had to cross into Spain at a different point than originally planned. By the time we had that all clear it added up to the sad news that we had crossed the Pyrenees all the way into Andorra and now we had to scale them again from Andorra to Spain. That was a deep blow, climbing the Pyrenees twice and at their most difficult points. The usual route traveled by the volunteers took only ten to twelve hours. We had been climbing two nights and two days, now we had to go on for another night and day, equipped more for an afternoon stroll than for climbing over wild, snow-covered mountains without any conditioning, without even food. But this was war and war meant hardships.

We shuffled on, a worn-out, bedraggled lot yet without a murmur of complaint. Many in the group limped wearily in their sodden, disintegrating street shoes. I was numb. I no longer felt separate pains only one all-pervading ache pressing on me with the relentless crush of a boa constrictor. I walked bent way forward, eyes vacantly to the ground. My thought processes were dulled—whenever some stray phrase entered my mind it stuck there revolving in slow repetition, over and over. It was an in voluntary suspension of conscious thought, an automatic exercise of life function, of motion and locomotion. I remember little of that night nor of the hours of daybreak that followed; I staggered on in a trance, keeping as close to the guide as I could.

We had to cross a very steep mountainside just below the crest, but the snow was so crumbly and slippery that when we got halfway through we hesitated to continue. The guide coaxed us, he said we had only a few hundred yards more of that and there was absolutely no other way to get around it, and when we still hesitated he walked on ahead making tracks in the snow, then returned making another parallel track. He told us to step care fully in his tracks and we finally followed—every step an excruciating balancing act as if walking a tightrope. Then it happened!

We were almost clear across when I lost my balance. I stumbled and fell and skidded down; down, down, farther down, ever farther down, fast, faster, then still faster and faster and faster. I was thrashing wildly to stop my slide but the skid was, out of control, I was sliding feet first, torso at an angle. I glimpsed a brush of dwarf pine sticking out the snow way below and tried to steer myself toward it but missed by a hair and went down and down, although at a lesser speed—the tip of the branch I had managed to get hold of before it was stripped out of my hands by my momentum had slowed me down somewhat. There was another scrub below, I managed to grab that, the impact swirled me around and I landed with my knees against a rock, dazed.

I was conscious of anger, of a deep burning fury that such an outrage should happen to <em>me</em>. My knees, particularly the right one, were swelling with pain. I rubbed them and rubbed them until my anger disappeared, and only then did I turn around to take stock of my surroundings. I was lying a few hundred yards from the bottom; I looked up and there was my group way far above, tiny two-dimensional figures with feet wide apart, as if drawn by some cartoonist in black ink against the snowy back ground of that mountain. I stood up and waved to them, they waved back but without a sound. They must have shouted but I did not hear a sound; I shouted also but my cry sounded feeble in the wind even to me—I was positive my voice hadn't reached them.

The guide started down, then retraced his steps and rejoined the group. There was a small huddle and then the column started. They went on, the bastards had abandoned me! Not a one looked back in my direction, not a one even waved to me again.

"The bastards deserted me," I kept repeating over and over not in anger nor in fear—my mind was simply stuck in a groove as I watched them disappear one by one after crossing that snow bank. Only then did my mind revert to reality. My right knee was badly swollen but not broken. My situation was desperate . . . No, it was serious, but not desperate. The thing to do was rest until the pain in my knee abated, then work my way down to the valley and continue down and down until I hit something.

We were only four hours away from our destination, the guide had informed us, we were heading west, and that was what I would do, that was an easy direction to keep.

"What if . . . ?" There were to be no "what ifs." Panic would be fatal. I was bound to make my way out if I took it easy and conserved my strength. Conserve my strength, that was the key.

"Conserve my strength." I kept that rolling around in my mind as 1 stretched out to catch a short nap. "Conserve my strength . . . conserve my strength . . ."

I do not know how long I had slumbered when I heard faint shouts.

"Voros, where are you? Where are you?"

"Here . . . Here . . . This way . . ." I shouted back still groggy with sleep. Then I recognized the voices of Van and the sailor. They soon came into sight and I tried to walk toward them but my right knee buckled under and wouldn't support me.

"That was a dumb trick to pull," said Van and he was angry. "We should've left you here," said the sailor and he meant it, he was definitely hostile.

My joy at seeing them turned to anger.

"I didn't ask you to come after me," I snapped back at them. "I saw you go on and leave me. What changed your minds?"

"I am responsible to the party for the three of us," said Van. "I had to come back for you. We'll make it together, the three of us, or we won't make it at all."

Nothing more needed to be said, he was fulfilling his duty. There was no comradeship involved, only the carrying out of a party assignment. I had difficulty in walking and the sailor was half carrying me for a while until my knee was well enough to enable me to rest my weight on my feet, gingerly.

Following a westward course we struck out down the mountainside until we hit the floor of the valley. It was a perilous trip. When we came across rocks that blocked our way they had to pull and boost me up. We waded across wild mountain streams waist-deep in icy water, carrying our shoes tied by the laces around our necks, grabbing hold of rocks in the stream bed to keep from being carried away by the rushing torrent. We struggled on without compass or map, following the direction of the setting sun, two men risking their lives to help a third, not out of compassion, not because he was a fellow human being, but because it was a party assignment. Unlike other working class movements, the Communist Party is singularly destitute of human comradeship. Membership in the Communist Party does not exclude individual friendship, nor is friendship encouraged. Van and the sailor had known each other and were friends. I was a comrade but a stranger. There was no common tie between them and me outside of our membership in the Communist Party. They had risked their lives for me and they knew I would risk my life for them. But they knew and I knew that were I to be killed or they, we would not mourn one another.

Just before nightfall we stumbled on a road. We followed it down about a mile and we came to a few huts. It was dusk and dozens of people rushed out to meet us. We were in Spain. With much shouting, handclasps, and friendly gestures they led us to a house farther down. We found our group there. They had reached it four hours ahead of us and were asleep until the noise of our arrival woke them. There was no joyous reunion. They merely nodded, a few words were said mainly to acknowledge our presence, then they went back to sleep.

"International solidarity . . . !"

I was beginning to wonder.
