---
title: Chapter 23
---

Weeks passed and then in September I received a letter. It came in a cheap white envelope, very poorly typed, with no return address. It instructed me to report to Section Headquarters of the Communist Party at eight o'clock in the evening on Broadway between 27th and 28th Streets where I would be assigned to a party unit.

It was an old building and I found Section Headquarters on the second floor, as I recollect it, in a large unpartitioned open loft. A bewildering hubbub of loud voices filled that hall and I couldn't attract anybody's attention. The entire floor space seemed jammed with people grouped in circles; some sat on folding chairs, some of them stood, others squatted on the dirty, littered floor.

It was a scene of utter confusion. The people in the center of those circles were talking to the people around them who in turn were calling and talking to people in the other circles. The groups seemed to overlap. I stood befuddled trying to orientate myself in that chaos until I managed to get hold of someone to show him my letter. He yelled out "Comrade Shapiro!" a couple of times and after a while a slightly built, red-haired young man came over to me. He had a peculiar gait, half shuffle, half shamble; he was slouched forward and he held his shoulders considerably hunched. He was around twenty-five years of age, with a prominent hooked nose and an incongruously thick lower lip; his pinched, narrow face resembled that of a fox. He was Shapiro, the Section Organizer. There was an air of vagueness about him; he appeared to be lost in all that confusion.

He glanced at my letter, wrote the unit's number on it, then pointed to a group past the center of the room, close to the rear.

I weaved and bumped my way over and handed my letter to a woman who was sitting on a folding chair with piles of books, magazines, and pamphlets by her feet on the floor. She read my letter and announced in a pleased voice:

"Attention, comrades. We have a new member here," and she smiled at me. The others in that group, there were nine, gave me a casual glance and resumed their conversations.

The lady (she was the chairman and unit organizer) was friendly. She was a chunky, plain-faced woman around thirty; she wore her hair braided and fastened into a ring. She had two flashing gold front teeth and was wearing a darkish unattractive dress. She had no make-up or lipstick on and she looked like most finishers in the shop, women but not females, or maybe females but not women, whichever it is that is not a sex object. She spoke with a heavy Polish-Jewish accent. She told me that as a fur worker I would be assigned to work with the furriers' fraction in the Needle Trade Workers Industrial Union. I informed her I did not belong to the Union.

"So you'll join it." She shrugged, disposing of that objection. "Why, you are very young. You should belong to the Y.C.L. You are a youth, you belong in the Young Communist League."

I did not like that at all. I told her I had been a grown-up man for quite a while, a man twenty-nine years old was no longer a youngster by any standards. She insisted that the Young Communist League had to be built. I did not dispute that, merely stated, not out of youngsters my age. She then dropped that subject and read me a long list of topics they planned to discuss that night.

The term "discussion" was misleading.

She started the meeting by reading a long-winded appeal from the International Workers Relief—I.W.R., she called it. It was about a strike somewhere and the poor strikers and their families were starving and the I.W.R. was feeding them, they needed help urgently. A collection was then taken up. She turned to me first and I gave five dollars. The others gave nickels and dimes.

Then came the International Labor Defense. Some strikers had been arrested, I do not recall whether they were the same starving ones or not. Money was needed for their defense. I now gave only two dollars, the others nickels and dimes.

Next came a collection for some other fund, then still another. I gave one dollar each time, the rest, nickels and dimes.

Then came the main topic. The <em>Daily Worker</em> was in a very bad financial situation, it faced suspension unless immediate substantial aid was forthcoming. I felt I had given enough by now so I contributed a dime. The others gave quarters, half dollars, someone even a dollar. Everyone was staring at me. It was most embarrassing, I even blushed. I would gladly have contributed more had I but known. But by now I resisted it; I wouldn't let anyone shame me into anything.

The chairman must have sensed how I felt and said to the group in general, "He is just a new member. He can't tell yet what is important and what is not."

Then they went on to literature. It had to be bought. I bought a copy of everything they had, about two dollars' worth. Each of the others bought only one pamphlet for a nickel. As I recall they made seven collections that night, maybe more.

Next came the distribution of collection cans; there was to be a Tag Day that Saturday. I do not recall whether it was for the <em>Daily Worker</em> or some other cause. I was handed a shiny tin can with a slot on top and the chairman assigned me to the uptown stairway of the Lexington Avenue subway station at 28th Street. That was exactly one and a half blocks away from where I lived. I was appalled. I had always entertained mixed feelings about beggars like most of us do, a mixture of annoyance, pity, disturbed conscience, and strong resentment at being accosted. Now I was assigned to become a beggar, right in my own neighborhood where I was known to all storekeepers, waiters, and clerks as a financially stable citizen. That was a situation I had not anticipated when I had filled out my application card. It was quite disturbing.

Next I was given an armful of leaflets to be distributed on my way home from work and in my shop.

I read the leaflet right there and it made very little sense to me. It was in English but a most peculiar kind; each word taken separately was clear but strung together in long sentences they seemed to have lost their meaning. It affected me like hearing "double-talk" for the first time. I told the chairman I was puzzled, I did not understand the meaning of that leaflet. She smiled at me encouragingly and assured me in her heavily accented dialect: "Never you mind, you shouldn't ought to worry, after you should be in America as long as I been, you'll understand English just as good as me, you gotta be patient."

When we adjourned the chairman flashed one of her warm gold-toothed smiles at me; she was fundamentally a nice person in her squat, shapeless way. As I was walking home I noticed it was past eleven o'clock. I was carrying an armful: leaflets, all the literature I had bought, and the collection can. Twenty-eighth Street was deserted. I passed an ashcan. There was no one around and on an impulse I dumped all the leaflets in the ashcan, except one which I kept to wrap around the can. As I walked away I became conscious of a strong feeling of remorse. I turned around to retrace my steps and retrieve those leaflets when I noticed a group of people turning in from the corner. That settled it. The leaflets really made no sense. Besides, I had been shamed, shaken loose from close to twenty bucks, had been handed a collection can like a beggar. That was enough for the revolution for one evening without turning myself into an ashcan scavenger as well.

Came Saturday and I dressed most carefully. As a final touch I even put on my new 1oo% camel's hair topcoat, though the weather did not call for it. Much as I loathed the idea of panhandling, as long as I was going begging I might as well do it in style.

Saturday morning traffic on Fourth Avenue was not heavy. I took my place at the subway entrance, my camel's hair coat over my arm, the can covered by the coat. Three youths who were together went down the steps. I let them pass. Two other men came, one following a few paces behind the other. I held out my can to the first one. My hand was hesitant, my timing poor, he never noticed the can as he walked down. I thrust my can out to the second man. He saw it, all right-he looked like a salesman or a clerk-he faced straight ahead pretending not to notice. Two girls came. I held out the collection can to them. They snickered, elbowed each other, and went down the steps giggling and whispering together. I became aware of a deep blush spreading on my face.

More people came, men and women both. My arm motion became more and more automatic, more precise. The reaction of the people continued the same. They either pretended they didn't notice the can, or appeared puzzled, or contemptuous. I decided to be selective, to try to guess who would give, and solicit only them. The same reaction. A man came by whom I knew and I hid the can quickly under my coat. Then traffic became heavier, working people, tieless shopworkers. Some of them gave me a sullen look, some grinned at me derisively, one man contemptuously slapped the can away with his hand. I felt like jumping on him but it was too late by then. My anger was rising, I felt like blocking the entrance and shouting to them: "You poor damned miserable bastards, you'd better put something into that can! I'm doing this for your own benefit," then knock their heads together to teach them how to respond to kindness, to an effort made for their welfare.

I stood my assigned post past my lunch time without receiving a single contribution. I would have quit long before except that my anger against those passers-by had turned into hatred against mankind in general and made me too stubborn to move. By two o'clock, traffic became so sporadic that I did quit. I walked into the cigar store farther down the block and asked the clerk, whom I knew, if he had $20 in change. He had. I went back home and as I broke open the rolls and dropped the coins one by one into the slot my anger slowly evaporated. At any rate, I had done my share and if the people were too stupid to realize their own interests, it was their own hard luck. At least the Party was not out any money even if it had to come out of my own pocket.

The next week at the unit meeting when it came to handing in the cans I was somewhat apprehensive. I wondered whether my collection would be deemed sufficient, I feared they would guess I had not stayed all day.

The first can was handed in and the chairman rattled it—it sounded empty. The comrade explained he had been too busy, he had been kept too long at a Section meeting, he hadn't found time to go out. The next can was handed back empty also. The third can rattled loudly. It contained 37 cents. The fourth can came back empty. When I handed over my can the chairman exclaimed happily.

"Comrades, this feels real heavy."

She rattled it and the sound came dull and muffled. A couple of comrades helped her count it, they announced it was $20.87.

It should have been $21.12, for I had also dropped $1.12 of my other change in it. They evidently miscounted a quarter. I almost corrected them before I realized what I would be doing. Everybody enthused and the chairman made a little speech. She told them how that proved again the importance of recruiting new members to the Party, they had enthusiasm and took their assignments seriously. One of the comrades grudgingly remarked that he also would have done much better had he a chance to go out among the masses, had most of his time not been taken up by inner Party work in the district. He was the one who had collected 37 cents. The other comrades spoke in similar vein, they complained that all their time was being taken up with going to meetings in the Section, they had no time left for outside activity.

The chairman partly agreed with them. She was the unit organizer, she had had to go to four meetings that past week, and yet she had found time to do some collecting because that was the most important task, the party couldn't function without finances. After all the money was in, the total came to a little over $25, the highest sum ever collected by that unit in any Tag Day. It was a big success and everyone was jubilant. Again I was handed one of the cans that had been returned empty. Since I was so good at collecting and had no other party assignments, I might as well continue with that party activity.

The rest of the second meeting was similar to the first; continuous wrangling and mutual recriminations about tasks not carried out. I gathered that the activity of party members consisted mainly in going from one party meeting to another, now in the Section, now in the District, listening to what should be done but with no time left for doing it.

One of the first things I learned was that a party member, in order to retain his good status, had to be dishonest with the Party, he had to know how to think up plausible excuses for not having attended all the meetings at which his attendance was compulsory, although he couldn't possibly have found time to go to all of them.

I also discovered that in the Party nothing was ever carried out the way it had been planned or originally agreed upon. Our unit had two long-standing projects, one of which was the holding of open air meetings at which all comrades were supposed to be present. The first of these meetings I went to was supposed to have been held in an empty lot somewhere in the West 100 block, a slum section near Central Park West. That meeting did not materialize because aside from myself and the Unit Organizer no other comrade showed up. The second open air meeting we went through with, although, including the Speaker who had been sent by the Section, there were only four of us present. Another comrade who also showed up promptly explained to us that he couldn't stay because he had to go to another most important party meeting. The speaker, a heavy-set man with a strong Brooklyn accent, spoke from an orange crate while the three of us stood around loaded with pamphlets and leaflets.

The speaker was very dull, he talked about Lovestone whom he denounced, ridiculed, and damned in turn. I tried to follow what he was saying but couldn't. All I learned from that speech was that Lovestone was a most repellent, physically deformed degenerate, a slimy counterrevolutionary, and a hairy capitalist tool. (Years later, when I met Lovestone personally in Cleveland at a CIO meeting, so strong was the impression that streetcorner speaker had made on me that I found it almost impossible to believe my own eyes. This Jay Lovestone, who had been General Secretary of the Communist party but later expelled, turned out to be a handsome, charming, highly cultured individual.)

After mopping the floor with Lovestone, the speaker talked on, and it was pathetic. It was like talking to the wind for we were unable to draw a crowd. A few passers-by would stop, listen for a minute or two and walk on. Some of them would accept the literature handed to them, most of them wouldn't. They would leave as soon as they saw us approach with what they must have thought was "the pitch."

The comrade speaker did his very best to interest them. He would raise his voice successively louder as he saw his audience walk away. Soon his voice was hoarse and scratchy. He kept this hopeless task up for about three quarters of an hour and then he quit.

After he stepped off that orange crate, he and the unit organizer estimated that we had drawn about fifty people. I thought they were joking.

However, at the next unit meeting the chairman, in giving an account of that street meeting again set the figure of the people in the audience around fifty, pronouncing the meeting a very successful one. I had to challenge that, she was deceiving the party.

In contradicting her report I told them what I had observed, that nobody paid any attention, that the few people who stopped did so out of mere curiosity and then immediately moved on. I told them that it was most important for the Party to stick to the truth because Marxian dialectics, like all logical systems, depended on recognition of the true facts for the development of appropriate tactics and policies. The facts were that a meeting of that sort could not draw or hold a crowd.

I can't say I expected to be applauded, but I certainly did not anticipate the reaction that ensued. Comrade after comrade, none of whom had been at that street meeting, rose indignantly to point out my ignorance and even to condemn me. According to them, that street meeting had been a success. The Communist Party had set a brave example by holding that meeting, it had demonstrated to the masses that the streets belonged to them. The Party had exerted leadership, had taught the masses how to use their rights and voice their grievances publicly, had imbued them with courage to stop and listen. What if they had stopped only for a few minutes? That was an excellent beginning, soon they would stay longer for courage grows by being put to test.

As they went on stressing that demonstration of Party leadership, that "exhibition of courage" began to take on heroic proportions. One comrade actually stated that the storming of the Winter Palace of the Czar in St. Petersburg in 1917 by the Bolsheviks would not have succeeded had the masses not been inspired by exactly such courageous Party examples. Then the discussion turned personal. I was criticized for having fallen down on my party work as proven by my poor collections of late. There was some truth to that charge, for having realized what a fool I had been I took to dropping only my loose change in the can.

Finally the Agit-Prop, the comrade in charge of Agitation and Propaganda, summed it all up. He welcomed my misdirected criticism, unfounded and ignorant as it was. The fact that I felt free to voice it was in itself a repudiation of the slanders of those antiparty elements who claimed there was no democratic discussion permitted in the Party. Then he pointed out the false petty bourgeois logic on which I had based my arguments. My arguments, first of all, showed defeatism in wanting the Party to abandon its right to free speech. Then he invoked Marxist-Leninist science which went far deeper than bourgeois science. It had been conclusively established that more than fifty people had stopped. That meant a representation of fifty families, say 250 people. Every one of those people had at least four friends, which brought it up to 1,000. Here we were dealing with one thousand people who had directly or indirectly been exposed to a demonstration of Communist leadership and courage, which in turn must have left an indelible impression on them. Come the right time, the right revolutionary situation, those masses would suddenly recall that meeting, they would receive inspiration from it and would go into action, give impetus to the revolution. In short, the seeds of revolution had been planted deep. He was applauded at this point. Finally he warned me that although the Party encouraged discussion I should refrain in the future from trying to spread defeatism and rotten bourgeois cynicism within the ranks of the Party.

Those people were absolutely cuckoos I was angry with myself for getting mixed up with them in the first place.

I was through with that bunch.
