---
title: Chapter 42
---

The home where we were quartered was more primitive than anything I had seen in the poorest villages in Hungary. It was more of a stable than a dwelling, with a rickety wooden stairway leading upstairs to three cubicles opening on a narrow wooden balcony, containing no other furniture than a few straw pallets that served as beds. They were open to the stable, screened only by a bead curtain in the entranceway. The stable floor was ankle deep with sticky manure; a dirt floor room downstairs, also open to the stable, served as the kitchen and family room. The stable housed three burros which bespoke a well-to-do family. The air was hazy and dense with steamy urine and the smell of the fermenting manure on the stable floor. Flies were commuting in swarms from the manure to the food in the kitchen, alighting insolently on our faces, feasting on the sore eyes of the children, crawling in and out of their runny noses. The stable also served as a toilet. There was no outdoor privy—human excrement was valued as the best fertilizer for that rocky soil and had to be conserved—members of the family relieved themselves openly on the stable floor under the eyes of the burros and whoever else happened to be around. That presented an embarrassing problem at first but this was war, there was no other place to go, one had to make do.

The villagers who came to visit us were friendly. No volunteers had come through this way before, this was their first contact with <em>extranjeros</em>. They were little aware of events outside their valley. They knew there was a war going on and that Franco was <em>muy malo</em> but had no conception of the real significance of the struggle being waged so far away from them. Later I was to find that ignorance typical in provinces far removed from the war zone. Illiteracy was one of the main reasons for that; preoccupation with eking out a miserable existence, and lethargy caused by malnutrition were some of the others.

The next day we managed to make contact with a <em>milicia</em> post in another village. The <em>milicia</em> men were at first incredulous that anyone could have crossed those mountains, secondly that <em>extranjeros</em> coming to help Spain would actually pass through their village. They belonged to the F.A.I. (Federation of Iberian Anarchists). They had no arms outside a few antiquated rifles, single-bolters that must have predated the Franco-Prussian War of 1869-1870. They got hold of a truck somehow and transported us to another <em>milicia</em> post in another town. Four of them came with us as escort. One of them proudly displayed an enormous revolver which was not loaded. I asked him about the shells, he had seven of them which he carried loose in his pocket. They did not fit his gun which somewhat marred his pleasure, still he was proud of his weapon and his munificent store of ammunition.

I took to these Spaniards at once, with a warmth I had not experienced in years. They were trusting and childlike, and I was glad I had come. It was apparent at a glance they needed guidance, direction, expert organization—things I was trained to supply. The truck bounced up and down that incredibly bad road jarring my bones to the marrow but I did not mind. I was lost in reverie, thankful for being a Communist, grateful to the Communist Party for providing me the opportunity to come to grips personally with the arch enemy of civilization, Fascism. I was an organizer and I was confident that I was a good one. Here in Spain, where the anti-Fascist front was much too broad to be stifled by Communist sectarianism, I would really be in my element. Freed of the phrase-parroting, bureaucratic control of the party leadership in America, we would really be in a position to base our tactics on reality instead of some cockeyed "party line."

It was a happy feeling to be a Communist now that I was in Spain. I was glad of having overcome my waverings, of not having quit the party. This was the fulfillment of life's ultimate purpose for a genuine humanitarian—to serve the downtrodden of the earth. I felt noble and uplifted and I did not awake until many hours later the truck dumped us at the railroad depot in Valencia.

The station was in a turmoil. A train full of volunteers had just pulled in from Barcelona including the survivors of the Spanish boat <em>Ciudad de Barcelona</em> that had been torpedoed by a Fascist submarine a mile and a half offshore from the Spanish fishing village of Malgrat, about 22 miles north of Barcelona, the boat's final destination. That was the boat I would have sailed on had Parker not agreed to let me cross through Andorra.

I recognized a number of Americans, Wallach among them. They crowded around me, some still in a state of shock, all of them greatly excited, each trying to impress on me his own version of the catastrophe, the miraculous way he had managed to escape with his life. They thought I was still with the <em>Daily Worker</em>. That was their first brush with death, the grim reality of war. Death had descended upon them suddenly, without any warning, and they were not prepared for the experience. In telling me their story some of them had difficulty holding back their tears. After all, they were young, still in their early twenties. They had volunteered in boyish enthusiasm to fight Fascism in Spain. They had not thought through to the fact that Fascism would fight back; that the game was for keeps; that the chip they risked was their life. I was doing my best to calm them. They indignantly demanded that something be done about that barbaric and brutal Fascist attack which, they vehemently insisted, was a direct violation of the Non-Intervention Pact. I couldn't help smiling as I explained to them that the precise reason all of us had come to Spain was to do something about such Fascist acts personally; and as it happened, our own presence at that railroad station was also a direct violation of that same Non-Intervention Pact. They insisted this was entirely different, that the Fascists had no right to do that to <em>them</em>. They had intuitively grasped what it took me years to learn, that for Communists there could be but one side to any story, theirs.

I was able to reconstruct fairly closely what had actually happened. There were over 500 volunteers on that boat out of whom nearly half had perished: those trapped in the hold when the torpedo struck, and those who couldn't swim or stay afloat until rescue arrived. None of them knew how many Americans had actually boarded that boat; checking their stories one against another my best estimate came to between 130-135 volunteers of whom only forty-six had escaped. Once I learned those casualty figures I also lost my penchant for objectivity and retired into a corner with my fistful of notes to cable the story to the <em>Daily Worker</em>. Although I had not intended to continue to write for it, this story was too hot, the details too sensational; the Party could make real political capital out of it. After working on it for about fifteen minutes at top speed I became aware that the volunteers were all rushing in one direction, forming a tight ring around somebody. I followed them and to my delight found that he was Robert Minor, the representative of the Central Committee to the Communist Party in Spain. Minor was also a member of the <em>Daily Worker</em> editorial staff; we had known each other for years.

Bob Minor was a tall, imposing figure, with a heavy frame and silvery white hair framing his massive, bald head. He was a famous cartoonist before he turned Communist and he carried himself with dignity and poise. I had a few messages of a confidential nature for him from the Central Committee, to be delivered orally, concerning individuals some of whom were on their way to Spain and some of whom were to report back immediately to the States. I had been given only the first names; I did not know who the people were, nor was it any of my business.

I noted an indefinable change in Minor's face since the last time I had seen him in New York, about a half-year earlier, and I was puzzled about it. Minor stood impassively in th center, listening to the American volunteers crowding about him without saying a word; but to my eyes he only appeared to be listening, I had the feeling he was not paying attention. I knew he was somewhat deaf but not sufficiently so not to have heard that clamor.

I stood aside and waited until the excitement subsided, then went up to him and greeted him. He regarded me as if had never seen me before, cold and disinterested. Realizing that my haggard face and tattered clothes after those rugged days of climbing the Pyrenees must have changed my appearance considerably, I told him my name and who I was. He cut me short abruptly; he knew very well who I was and why was I bothering him him, didn't I see he was busy? I was quite taken aback by that unexpected response. I told him I had a few messages for him from the Ninth Floor and took him aside to deliver them. He cocked his ear close to my mouth and I realized he was even more hard of hearing than I suspected. I had to repeat my message twice and louder before he nodded his head that he had understood. I then told him I already had all the facts about the sinking of the <em>Ciudad de Barcelona</em>, the names of the American survivors, their home towns, etc., that my story was already organized, all I needed from him was a typewriter so I could knock it out in a hurry for the <em>Daily Worker</em>.

Minor became livid with anger.

"Give me those notes," he shouted at me and grabbed them out of my hand.

"Not a word of this must be permitted to leak out in America, do you hear? What are you trying to do, demoralize the people back home?"

Something was wrong with that man.

"Bob, this is news, sensational news, the best propaganda we could wish for to arouse the American people," I expostulated. "With the details I have, this story will be picked up by the wire services. Every home town newspaper where a local boy was involved will feature it as: Local boy killed or escapes with life from boat torpedoed by Fascists!"

"Not a word of this must leak out, you understand?" Minor roared at me.

"See here, Comrade Minor, this torpedoing has already been reported in the Valencia papers. It must have been cabled to the United States and published there already. This story will be the follow-up, it will fill in the missing details and shake up those people back home who still do not believe what Fascism really is. This is the propaganda we want, where the facts speak for themselves: Americans torpedoed and drowned on the open seas by Fascists!"

"You're not to mention a word about this to anyone, do you hear! This is an order!" With that he stalked away from me, called the Americans together, and made a speech.

He told us that we were all anti-Fascists who had come to Spain to fight Fascism. He told us Fascism was the last desperate attempt of capitalist imperialism in its death throes to drown in blood the inevitable rise of the working class and that Fascism would meet its tomb in Spain.

He rambled on and on like a <em>Daily Worker</em> editorial on the glory of the Soviet Union and finally told us that we had already met the baptism of fire heroically and come out victorious. He then admonished us on our honor as anti-Fascists, as the bravest flowers of the revolutionary working class, not to let a word of that torpedoing leak out, we mustn't even discuss it among ourselves any further because that would only lend aid and comfort to the Fascists who had ears all over, who were listening everywhere, and it would also demoralize our comrades, the other volunteers in Spain.

"That is an order!" He added for emphasis, then walked briskly away.

That speech had its effect. The comrades immediately fell to discussing how they mustn't talk about the torpedoing any more, first in hushed tones, later arguing with each other loudly, citing and inventing gory incidents to prove how easily such news could demoralize comrades less firm in their anti-Fascists beliefs than they.

I was to meet Minor again a few months later, on my way back from the Cordoba front. By then I had heard enough stories about him to make me even more cynical about our top leadership. Minor had been assigned by the American Central Committee to co-ordinate the propaganda efforts of the American and Spanish Communist Parties and, incidentally, also to represent before the Comintern the interests of the American volunteers in Spain. However, Minor had also caught the bug—like other leading Communists, he became convinced that he was a master strategist and a military genius. He spent his time in Spain devising military campaigns and giving unsolicited military advice to the Spanish Communist Party. At that second meeting, after listening for a whole evening to his military theories, I realized he was oblivious of the political and military developments around him and that he was becoming senile. It was this Minor who reported on Spain to the American Party from his hotel in Valencia, and when we read his analyses in the <em>Daily Worker</em> we wondered how such naive concepts could be advanced by anyone who had ever set foot in Spain, much less a high-ranking Party leader with access to inside information.

Minor was only one in that host of propagandists who spread a blanket of misleading optimism about the course of the Spanish Civil War. That propaganda was so all-embracing that it brought even the most objective foreign correspondents in Spain under its spell. Ultimately this proved to be a disservice to the Spanish Loyalist Government—in fact, it can be argued that it actually contributed to her defeat by creating false illusions about her chances for victory. Had the actual truth about the precarious position of Loyalist Spain been revealed in time, the democratic nations of the world might have been induced to intervene and find an effective solution to forestall her ultimate tragedy.

As I just now discovered, hindsight is not difficult to develop—anyone can do it if he lives long enough.
