---
title: Chapter 40
---

Julius and I had no trouble crossing from England into France. In Paris we went to the address supplied to us in New York—the headquarters of a Communist controlled French trade union. After much cautious questioning in our halting French we finally managed to contact the right person. He was a shabbily dressed Frenchman who cursed and swore and wanted to know why in hell we couldn't have got there in the morning when another group of volunteers had arrived. We pleaded that we took a taxi immediately a arrived from Cherbourg. That did not mollify him, he fumed and walked away, leaving us to sit on the filthy cobblestones for well over an hour. When he came back he cursed us again, and then said to follow him. He walked ahead not heeding us, letting us follow as best we could, struggling with our heavy suitcases. After about twenty minutes of going through side streets and back alleys he pointed to a building and turned back without a further glance, obviously relieved to have gotten rid of us. This unanticipated manifestation of international solidarity was a rude jolt, a foretaste of things to come.

The building he pointed out was the French headquarters of the American volunteers.

The man in charge was Parker—a sincere, hard-working comrade in his late twenties. His job was to arrange for lodging and transportation of the American and Canadian volunteers with the French party, which was in over-all control of the International Brigades. The French party gave him grudgingly little co-operation. There were about six hundred American and Canadian volunteers then in France, waiting for weeks to cross into Spain, and more were expected to land with every ship. The Spanish border had been shut tight by the French by order of the Non-Intervention Committee, which accounted for that bottleneck. A number of volunteers were languishing in French jails, arrested by the French while trying to cross the Pyrenees into Spain.

Both Dr. Hene and I had been told in New York that special steps would be taken in Paris to get us to Spain in a hurry through special channels. Parker knew nothing about this. There were only two special ways to get people into Spain; one was by submarine and the other by a solitary small plane—our importance definitely did not rate that. There was nothing for us to do but await developments. Parker told me he was very much pinched for funds, which was rather strange considering all the money that had been collected in the U.S. for Spanish aid, plus what Mills had told me about money received by the party from abroad for the sending of volunteers. The food allowance of the volunteers waiting in Paris had been cut repeatedly and some of the shabby lodgings harboring them had even threatened to evict them for falling behind in their rent. Parker was glad when in view of the situation Dr. Hene and I offered to find our own quarters and pay our own board.

The next transport scheduled to leave was to go by boat directly to Barcelona but there was the danger that the French authorities would prevent her departure and arrest the pas­sengers. A way was found for Dr. Hene to go openly to Spain, by train, as a member of a medical team. An attempt was also to be made to explore a new approach into Spain via the Re­public of Andorra. It was a much longer and more perilous climb over the Pyrenees than the previous 12-hour route to Spain, but the Andorra border was far less heavily guarded and the chance of detection was smaller. Because that route was untried and considered hazardous, only a small initial group was to be sent as an experiment. I persuaded Parker to let me join that group—altogether there were to be fifteen of us, of all nationalities. Before we left for Toulouse in Southern France, Parker assigned two other Americans, both seamen, to that group putting me in their charge. One was an American second mate of Dutch origin who told me to call him Van. I forget the name of the other one. (He was later killed in Spain.)

Van was in his forties, a stolid man of few words. The other was a tall, broad-shouldered young man from somewhere in the Middle West. Van was a Communist but the other seaman knew very little about the movement. He was attached to Van and when he saw Van volunteer he joined up also. There was little communication between them and me—they stuck close to each other and regarded me as a stranger.

Before we left for Toulouse a young volunteer who had been helping around headquarters in Paris came to wish me luck. He was a strikingly handsome young man with an ingratiating smile, a winning personality, and erect military bearing. His name was Alfred Wallach, he claimed to have been an officer in the National Guard. He asked me to take him with my group. I had no objection, he was a likable chap, he would have made a good companion. Parker vetoed the request. He wanted Wallach to go by boat, he had recently undergone an operation and Parker thought him too weak for that arduous trip. Wallach accepted the refusal quietly; I showed more disappointment than he. I came to rather like him, little dreaming he would eventually be executed by the S.I.M. in Spain.

Before we left for Toulouse I invited Wallach out for a drink. He took me to a place where he said they liked Americans. It was an ordinary working class saloon on an ordinary street with an ordinary swinging door. The long bar on the left was surrounded by a number of Frenchmen in working clothes. The tile floor was covered with sawdust and girls in pairs were sitting around the small tables covered with cheap checkered cloths placed against the wall. The printed signs above the tables, translated from the French, read:

"15 francs, everything included."
"Soldiers on leave from Algiers, 12 francs."

The girls obviously did like Americans for we had hardly sat down when they surrounded us, one on each side of me, a third perching on my lap. That cafe was evidently not designed for American fashion buyers in search of the latest in French styles. Those girls wouldn't have been of much help to them­—they wore absolutely nothing. It was rather confusing to have a naked girl on one's lap and two others hanging closely on each side—that was not the kind of mass action I had been trained for. As I was unobtrusively trying to free myself from those foreign entanglements another woman appeared at our table.

She was as black as black could be, the most enormous woman I ever saw in my life. She must have been the original "five­-by-five," as broad as she was tall, with underinflated huge breasts supported by a purple sash to keep them from bumping her knees. She stopped in front of me, winked, and then turned around. Now I understood that wink; it was meant for us as Americans. Her enormous buttocks sported a friendly greeting in white ink, in English.

"Hallo," said the one on her left buttock. "God-bye," said the other. I frowned.

Wallach asked me what was wrong. He blinked when I told him: "She only has one <em>o</em> in 'good.'"
