---
title: Chapter 11
---

The next morning I went over to the Town Hall early. No one was standing guard and the cell was empty. The sergeant and his three cronies were gone and two more men with them. I discovered that a few cabinets had been broken open and I found chisel marks even on the town safe, but it hadn't been entered.

I walked over to the depot. The freight-car door gaped wide open, the broken lock hanging from it. The car had been stripped bare. That must have been done after I left, later in the night.

I went back to the Town Hall. It was still early but a number of Councilmen were already there busily discussing the events of the night before. I stopped near the door, unnoticed. One of the Councilmen who had called me from my hotel was holding down the center, describing the scene with wide gestures and great detail, embroidering it with touches that were new to me. I came out very well in his story, or so I thought, yet some of the others were saying that I was to blame, I was responsible for the men, I should have had better control over them, the sergeant and his friends were obviously bandits, look how they tried to break even the safe open! How could an officer of judgment have picked such men who were obviously habitual criminals, to guard people's life and property? Well, after all, he is only a young boy! True, yet it was like entrusting wolves to guard a flock of sheep, and so on. I walked away.

I went to my remaining six men, discussed with them what had happened. They were evasive and I did not press them. I had them clean and oil all rifles including those the sergeant and the others had left behind. I took a rag and, for the first time, helped them with the task; it gave me something to do.

After lunch I went up to my room to sleep. I felt very low, a new mood for me. I slept a few hours and then went to see Yolly. Her father greeted me, but not in his usual hearty "Come in, come in, glad to see you, make yourself at home" manner. He was rather curt, said he had to go back to his office, and left right away.

Yolly was not in the parlor. Her mother told me she was studying in her room. They had news that the schools would be reopening soon, as soon as they could get in a supply of coal. I told her I would wait and sat around playing with the dog. Yolly did not come out of her room so finally I got up and said it was time for me to go. Her mother did not ask me to stay for supper, nor had she offered me some of her cake, as she always used to.

I went out and passing by the window I saw Yolly studying under the kerosene lamp on her table. I rapped on the window and she came over and opened it. We talked but neither of us had anything much to say. She told me she had forgotten all she had learned in school and she had to catch up. She also said that her parents thought we were spending too much time together and it would have to stop, it might lead to talk. That was peculiar, for her parents had been practically pushing us on each other, but I did not mention that to her. She said her room was getting cold with the window open. I said "<em>Au revoir!</em>" and helped her close the window.

It was by then nearly six o'clock and dark. I went back to Town Hail. I found a captain there talking with the Town Clerk, the Council President, and a few other people.

When they saw me come in the group broke up, the Councilmen saying loudly to each other, too loudly I thought, that it was time they got home for supper, the wife was raising holy hell about their always being late; then they left, shaking hands with me on their way out.

The captain, who had been standing aside during this time, now came over to me. I saluted him and he returned the salute. He introduced himself, he was the son of one of the Councilmen. He had just returned from the hospital that morning, he had been wounded in the arm by shrapnel on the Isonzo front. He was very friendly and told me from what he had heard I did a splendid job of restoring order, he was personally proud of it. He then casually added that my grave responsibilities were over, that he was taking over Public Safety beginning next morning. He told me to supervise the patrols as usual for that night, next morning he wanted a full report from me, and then we would discuss what would follow.

I left him, checked the patrol which was about to go out, and went back to the hotel for supper. After supper I took the second patrol out myself. The townspeople making up the patrol were overpolite. They made attempts to joke with me but it sounded forced. After we completed the first round, I left them and went back to the hotel.

The cashier was manicuring her nails and she gave me her usual wide smile with her gold teeth flashing. I asked the headwaiter for a bottle of cognac and then went over to her, invited her to come to my room as soon as she was free, we would get drunk and have a real party.

She laughed. She was pleased but she couldn't, not that night. She had a date with the captain.

I went to my room, took a couple of drinks out of the bottle, then a couple more, and went to bed. I felt very much alone.

The next morning I walked over to the depot and found a freight train standing there headed north, the direction of my home town. It was trying to get up steam and the engineer told me they would leave when and if they could load up with enough wood.

I went over to Town Hall to see the Town Clerk. He was busy and for the first time he made me wait. I watched him enter items in a ledger for a while, then touched him on the shoulder and told him I wanted to speak to him officially, I was going home. He was polite, but did not act surprised. He told me the town and the citizens would miss me. He wished me good luck, he did not ask me to stay on.

I asked him for my pay. He said that if the Mayor were in town I would have no difficulty, he could then pay me on the spot, but unfortunately, the Mayor was still absent. He couldn't pay me on his own authority; as commander of the guard I was a sort of town official in charge of public safety; my pay would have to be taken up by the Town Council which would meet formally three weeks later. However, he did not anticipate my having too much difficulty with them.

I told him there was a freight train waiting at the depot, I needed my money at once for I was leaving on that train. He was very sorry, very sorry indeed, he brushed his mustache with a small brush, it was indeed most regrettable, but he personally couldn't do anything about my pay without authorization. He asked me to leave my home address, they would mail my money to me there. I believed him and gave him my father's address. He then offered me a personal loan of twenty kronen as a friend, out of his own pocket. I had 990 kronen coming to me. I declined the loan. We shook hands and I left.

I went to say good-bye to the men. They were sorry to see me go and they showed it. We shook hands all around. I took two blankets off one bed because the weather was very cold and I had no overcoat. I noticed a piece of hard sausage on the table and asked the men if it was all right for me to take that along. It was more than all right with them. They even dug up another piece and two hunks of bread. I took a pack, folded one of the blankets and put it into the pack with the food, and threw the other blanket around my shoulders. That did not look military but I did not care. I made a present of my saber to the corporal and left the pistol and holster on the table with instructions to give them to the captain. That was my demobilization. I was through with the army!

I walked over to the station with the pack hanging from my left arm, on the side where my saber used to be. It felt strange walking without the heavy saber, my right foot would still automatically make that small circular kick that kept the saber from tripping one up. My right hand was clutching the blanket around my neck, for my throat felt sore. My body was hot and I was sneezing, my nose was beginning to get runny. I felt a bad cold coming on. I had an extra pair of trousers and some underwear in the hotel but did not bother to go back for them.

White steam was rising from the funnel of the locomotive. We ought to be able to start soon, said the engineer. The fireman said I could travel with them on the engine, it would be warmer. There was no caboose. I got in the cab with them but there was no room to sit down, I had to stand. The warm fire felt good but my knees began to tremble, I felt weak and wanted to lie down. I got off the cab, went to the first box-car but, strangely, I couldn't make the jump. I had to clamber up slowly, like an old woman, and crawl inside. I was really weak. I struggled with the door for quite a while to close it behind me. I finally managed it by pushing with both my hands and shoulder. I pulled the blanket out of the pack, laid my pack in the corner for a pillow, rolled myself in one blanket and spread the other over me. The boards were hard but it felt very good to be lying down. Never before had I needed to lie down so badly. I was feverish. I did not hear the train start.

When I awoke, it was very dark inside the car and it was also dark through the crack outside. I was very hot and thirsty but I had forgotten to bring along water. I had the sausage and bread but did not feel like eating and went back to sleep. I kept waking and dozing off; my feet were icy cold yet my body was very hot and I kept throwing my blanket off and then pulling it back, over and over again. Sometimes it was light through the crack, sometimes it was dark; when I was awake I kept staring at the crack near the door but I was not thinking of anything, just staring.

A long, long time later I woke again. I was freezing all over, my head was swollen, fiery pains were stabbing through my feet. The train was not moving. I groped for my blankets and my pack, they were gone. Somebody must have stolen them from under me, leaving the door half open. I crawled to the door on all fours and saw we were in a freight yard. I had a difficult time letting myself down from the car. When my feet touched ground, they wouldn't support me and I fell. I raised myself up, but it took time-my legs were numb and very stiff, they did not feel like my own legs at all. The sky was pinkish gray in the early dawn.

Another freight train was getting up steam. I hobbled over and asked the engineer where he was heading. He told me to Gyor, which was my hometown. Resting every few steps, I made my way to one of the cars and after a few starts managed to pull myself up. I was hot and shivering. I did not have the strength to push the door shut so I crawled to the farthest corner and rested. After a while I sat up and leaned against the wall, took my shoes off, and began rubbing my feet. My feet didn't feel the skin of my hands, only the pressure. We traveled for a long, long time and I kept massaging my feet endlessly, over and under, over and under, back and forth. I also had to keep my body rocking forward and back to keep it from freezing, it was that cold. When we reached Gyor, it was evening. I was feverish again, just dimly conscious. I rolled out of the car and dragged myself to a fiacre for the ride home. The family all crowded around and I asked what day it was. It was Wednesday, early in December.

I had been on the road three days.

My folks put me right to bed and it took more than a week before I got some of my strength back. It was the Spanish flu, the Doctor said, marveling that I had survived that trip. My feet were frostbitten, so were my nose and ears, but they were getting better.

When I was able to get up and move around I found I was penniless. I hadn't received my pay in Kobanya, I had forgotten to collect my pay from the Food Ministry, I hadn't received my pay from the Doctor in the sanatorium, I hadn't received my pay from the Town Council in Siofok. I should have had well over 1,2oo kronen, big money those days. I sure was an idiot. I had to ask my father for spending money although the family was very hard up because of the inflation. He gave me two kronen, then seeing the disappointed look on my face, he raised it another krone. He couldn't really afford it.

I wrote to the Town Council of Siofok for my money twice. I never received an answer. I did not bother to write to the Doctor, I knew the score there. But a town . . . ? A town council was a sort of government, it shouldn't have acted that way, a government shouldn't cheat a person. . .

A few nights later I was late coming in, it must have been close to eleven o'clock. I took my shoes off in the vestibule and sneaked in on stocking feet to avoid being detected. My father woke up, he was a light sleeper, and gave me a terrific dressing down. He wanted no son of his to become a vagabond, squandering his father's hard-earned money, staying out that late at night at his age. . . .

I slunk off to bed, feeling very wronged. My father was unjust, totally lacking in understanding. I felt very sorry for myself, my eyes were moist, my throat was choking up. My father was too strict with me, he was too old-fashioned, he wanted me to stay home all evening, my eyes had tears in them by then. I hugged my youngest brother for love and comfort, he was sharing the bed with me. I thought how unfair my father was and I began to cry.

I was back home, again a child.
