---
title: Chapter 50
---

Merriman, who was wounded early on February 27, did not know the real extent of the casualties suffered by his battalion. As I was able to piece it together later, out of a total number of 377 effectives on the battalion list, 153 had been killed on that day alone. That was the day the Lincoln mutinied and demanded to be withdrawn. About the casualties, if I err it is on the conservative side. For the appalling fact is that no one in the Communist Party in the United States or in Spain bothered to keep a record of the names of the first volunteers sent to Spain. The Party was paid by the head, it received its cut from the World Tourists travel agency on the transportation of every volunteer shipped; its interest was in the amount of that total take. The identity of the individuals was a matter of total indifference to the party.

The volunteers who arrived daily in small groups did not know each other well, couldn't tell who was missing in battle outside of those in their own narrow circle. My effort to compile the actual list was made even more difficult by the fact that more than one out of every two American volunteers who participated in the Jarama battles had been killed right in those early days, and many of the remaining survivors lost their lives in the battles of Brunete before I was able to reach them. Thus the list will never be accurately completed.

There is more to this story. If failing to keep a list of the volunteers sent overseas were not bad enough, the Party, instead of notifying the wives, parents, or other close relatives of men killed in battle, actually prohibited news of their death from being sent out to them from Spain. The party preferred to prolong their agony in order to squeeze the last ounce of energy and monetary assistance out of them, lest their grief make them unwilling to contribute further support. Let me quote here at random from one of the hundreds of letters from home marked "Dead," that I found moldering in a trash can in the American Base Commissariat. One of the comrades who worked as a censor tipped me off to their existence, first swearing me to absolute secrecy. It was dated March 18, 1937, and addressed to Walt Durham, <em>Socorro Rojo</em>, Room 17-1, Albacete, Spain. (I have changed the name—why break open old wounds?)

<blockquote markdown=1>
Darling—

Today is a month since I heard from you, a month of watching the mail box. The only thing that cheers me up a little is when I read in our paper—of the many victories of the Loyalists. Then I forget myself and my own heartache and consider the wonderful thing you are doing, and all the fighters of democracy, to ease the heartache of the whole world and make it a better place. Sweetness, although I get no mail from you I will continue to write every Thursday and Sunday as I have been doing. I know you are writing if you are able and I have the utmost faith that through all these hard times and lonely days you will someday soon come back to me and we will take up our life together, but it will be a thousand times sweeter than before.

Darling, tonight at our meeting the comrades all asked that I convey to you their love and good wishes. Charlie, who had stayed away all this time came tonight and promised to come to the next meeting. We are right on the job with leaflets every week and good leaflets too. Our unit is also collecting a lot of money for Spain, also food and clothing.

Darling, otherwise there is no news . . . On the outside my life is the same as before except that I feel more responsibility toward my party work. I am trying to take your place as much as I can. But sweetheart in my heart there is a steady longing that does not leave me for a minute. That longing for you, for your sweetness. Darling, I hold on to your few letters and read them over and over, also all the old letters. I carry them with me to work every day and darling your presence has never left my mind. Darling I will close now with my best and sincerest wishes to all your brave comrades and to you the same plus all my love and a million kisses. Darling I wait hopefully for a letter. . . .

Your comrade and wife
Olga.

P.S. Love from your two sons.
</blockquote>

Comrade Durham had been dead for a month by then but his grieving wife and comrade was calculatingly kept in ignorance by her comrades in leadership of the party. They did not want her to know that she was a widow and her two sons half-orphaned. They let her continue to pen tear-soaked letters twice a week in despondent hope, without even affording her the consolation of the certainty which, heartrending as it may be, affords an anchor for the distraught mind and permits the healing process to begin. Let her be tormented by gnawing uncertainty and despair, the facts that really counted were that Charlie was coming back to the meetings and that the unit was raising even more money for "Spanish Aid," which, of course, went into the party kitty.

Less than a cent out of every dollar, not a full one per cent of the monies collected for Spanish Aid, had been turned over by the party for that purpose.

Pressed hard at a subsequent congressional investigation to account for the expenditure of these funds, the party, with its usual lying ingenuity, first denied having received anything but a small, insignificant sum, then claimed that it had actually devoted seventeen per cent to the purpose for which it was raised. Then came the joker. The party did not dare to assert that even this small percentage had been expended in cash. This seventeen per cent had been computed as the alleged value of the used clothing sent to Spain—an allegation which in no way explained what the party did with the cash contributions amounting to millions of dollars.

The extent of this infamy is best illuminated by another incident. During the time of the Aragon Fascist offensive in the spring of 1938, when newspapers in the United States were full of the debacle of the Spanish Loyalist Army, in the period when Herbert Matthews, known for his sympathies for the Loyalists, reported in the New York <em>Times</em> that the International Brigades had been cut to ribbons and only about 150 Americans had managed to escape with their lives, all through those agonizing weeks and for nearly two months thereafter the letters sent by the surviving volunteers in Spain had failed to reach their families in the United States. The letters the comrades were receiving from home were frantic with fear and despair, begging for at least a line of assurance that their beloved son, husband, or father was alive, even if crippled and in the hospital. We were so disturbed by the avalanche of those tearful letters that we organized a "write a letter home" campaign in the XV Brigade, assigning not only my staff but demanding of all commissars to see to it that every surviving volunteer actually wrote at least one letter home. Yet the pleas from back home kept arriving, ever more desperate, ever more frantic. I went up to Barcelona to investigate. All those letters had left Spain for France as usual.

Finally the truth came out—those letters had been left piling up for months in the Paris office of the American Communist Party, instead of being mailed to America by affixing French postage stamps on them. The explanation? Some comrade in the office had absconded with the stamp money. When I raised hell, why hadn't the party immediately provided other money, I was told the party was short of funds! Collections in the U.S. were at their peak then and were even further stimulated by the news of the debacle—yet the party at home found better use for that money than to lay out another hundred dollars or so for stamps for the surviving volunteers in Spain.

I had made many excuses for the party before that incident and also later. After all, I and the rest of the comrades put together constituted the party. Some of us would occasionally try to separate ourselves from certain acts and policies by blaming it on the "party leadership." Yet we were all part of that leadership even though the higher-ups had all the say and the lower-downs none.

This is why I don't know yet whom to blame for letting those frantically awaited letters from the battlefields lie there for months because of those niggardly few dollars. I only know what I said when the comrade from Paris tried to justify that act, protesting and proving to me he wasn't responsible for it.

"I believe you, comrade, individually you are not responsible. But collectively, every single son of a bitch of us is."
