---
title: Chapter 54
---

The fascist Aragon offensive was the curtain raiser to World War II, but the democracies wouldn't believe that. Hitler supplied the blitz strategy and the Nazi planes, pilots, tanks, artillery, technicians that went with it; Mussolini contributed his Italian legions, more than 200,000 men, and a profusion of war material.

The God-fearing, Bible-reading democracies did not learn from the Scriptures. Instead of rushing to the aid of the rightfully constituted Loyalist government they fled every man into his tent and clamped an arms embargo on Spain preventing her from obtaining arms with which to defend herself, While closing their eyes to Hitler's and Mussolini's open support of Franco. British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, a pious manufacturer from Manchester, was trying to buy peace through a covenant with Hitler, refusing to recognize in him Nahash the Ammonite who like Hitler in his <em>Mein Kampf</em> spoke plainly in Samuel I: "On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes . . ."

Vincent Sheean, the famous liberal news correspondent, had a blind trust in President Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Driving down from Barcelona together with Lady Diana, he managed to contact us at the most critical phase of our retreat. Appalled by what he saw, that all we had were a few rifles, machine guns, and hand grenades with which to resist the mechanized Fascist troops, he reached for a pad and wrote out a passionate plea to his personal friend, President Roosevelt, asking me to cable it to the White House. It was way past midnight then, we were in a small crowded hut which was feebly lit, like the catacombs of old, by a single spluttering wick floating in a saucerful of olive oil. Sheean stood with head bowed as in prayer with Lady Diana proudly erect at his side; the rising and falling shadows in that cramped adobe hut heightened the effect of that moving scene. The drama of history touched us all and I did manage to find a way, against all odds, to send that cable out that same night.

F.D.R., the humanitarian and great liberal, read that cable and his left eye turned moist with tears over the agony of the Spanish people. President Roosevelt, the politician, scanned that cable with his right eye which stayed dry, being fixed on the strong Catholic bloc clamoring for all-out support of Fascist Franco and his Moors, those infidel defenders of the true Catholic faith. The provisions of the arms embargo were not lifted, they were tightened instead.

While the democracies, each man in his tent, awaited the very great slaughter, the Soviet Union acted, but in a most peculiar manner. The Great Red Father in the Kremlin, unlike Teddy Roosevelt, believed in talking loud yet he carried only a little stick—and all he sent us was slivers of it, one sliver at a time.

The matériel sent to Spain by the Soviet Union was fed to us in driblets, just enough to prolong the fighting but not enough to assure victory.

The Soviet fighting planes, the "Mosquitoes," were superior to anything the Fascists had, their Russian pilots were good and brave. But the Kremlin sent very few, and those only when Loyalist defeat seemed imminent. A hundred or so Soviet fighter planes sent in time might have wrested air superiority from the Fascists and defeated their Aragon offensive. They were not sent.

The Soviet tanks we received were so insignificant in number that the Russians in command of them were fearful to risk them in battle. Far from stiffening our resistance these Steel monsters would turn tail just when we needed their support the most, leaving the defenders demoralized.

The Soviet rifle was a light and accurate weapon although its steel bolt was not sufficiently tempered; in rapid firing it had a tendency to jam because of heat expansion. The Soviet artillery we received consisted mainly of 75-mm. fieldpieces, at least I did not encounter any larger-caliber Soviet make guns on any front. Those 75-mms. were hard hitting, sturdy, quick firing, and easy to bring into action. But the Russians sent few of them, pitifully few.

Although most of us in the Brigade sensed the true situation, we would not admit it even to ourselves. Materialists as we all professed to be, at heart we were still romantic idealists who believed in the strife between Good and Evil as the eternal order of the universe; that by natural law Good is bound to win out over Evil for that was the evolutionary direction of mankind.

We just couldn't believe, and I was one who felt that way, that the democracies would actually abandon Loyalist Spain to the Fascists. I had firm faith that the reactionaries, Chamberlain and Sumner Welles, the socialist Blum, and the liberal Roosevelt would eventually awaken to the danger confronting the world from Fascism and act in time to forestall catastrophe. Blinded by our own propaganda I did not know then that it was the "reactionary" Sumner Welles who wanted to lift the embargo and it was the liberal F.D.R. who allowed it to stay clamped down.

Life in the Brigade following the Aragon disaster was comparatively uneventful and left no outstanding impressions in my memory. Only a few hundred of our men, out of seven thousand, escaped from that debacle—to my infinite relief Captain Hernández was among them. Some escaped by swimming the Ebro, Johnny Gates was one. Sam Goldman, the Cleveland attorney and my former roommate, came to a different decision. After marching day and night to elude the pursuing Fascists he suddenly sat down on the road, telling his two pleading comrades to go on without him, he was through running. He took off his boots, spread his remaining few clips of bullets in from of him, and set about cleaning his rifle. His last stand was to be made right there; he was ready to go down but not without taking a few Fascists with him. I lived in hopes for weeks before I accepted that fatal news as final.

In the reorganization of the Brigade, John Gates, the ranking Y.C.L. leader after Doran's death, became Brigade Commissar. He was intelligent, energetic, and capable. I liked Johnny Gates, particularly his modest behavior in contrast with Doran's personal exultation in the power that went with his position.

Gates was about twenty-four years old then. He was born to poverty in New York and lived in semistarvation as a Y.C.L. organizer in Akron before he left for Spain. Where most Americans in Spain became debilitated from the monotonous diet of chick-peas cooked in plain water and rancid olive oil; where most Americans became nauseated even by the sight and smell of it, Johnny Gates would put away huge portions of it with gusto. Nearly all of us lost weight in Spain, victims to vitamin deficiencies. I went down from 175 pounds to 129, my skin broke out and oozed pus from innumerable boils, my knee joints were creaky and dry, my night vision became poor. But Gates's once skinny frame filled out from the <em>garbanzos</em> and took on blood and muscle. I had asked him about that on the Cordoba front as I watched him gobble up a large bowl of those foul smelling chick-peas (of which I could hardly get down a few spoonfuls), then go back for another helping, and still a third. Gates smiled sheepishly.

"I'll tell you, comrade, I have been so hungry all my life, I am happy that here I can eat all I want. I just love <em>garbanzos</em>."

The Brigade also received a new commander. Lieutenant Colonel Copic had been recalled to Moscow and he left with trepidation, not knowing what awaited him, fame or a bullet in the back of his head in some G.P.U. prison. The new Brigade Commander was an Asturian, a capable man of around thirty-two who had suffered a long term of imprisonment for his leading role in the revolt of the Asturian miners in 1934, Major José Antonio Vallador. In our counteroffensive across the Ebro River he soon proved worthy of our respect.

During that period of rest and reorganization the Brigade became Mecca to American and English visitors bringing anti-Fascist greetings and reassurances from home: "Carry on the magnificent fight, comrades, the people of the world are behind you." I shunned contact with the visitors as much as I could, by that time I'd had my fill of that self-deceiving propaganda. I particularly avoided meeting newspapermen, some of whom like Matthews, Sifton Delmar, Vincent Sheean I held in great respect. I didn't want to give them a chance to draw out of me the inside story back of those glowing accounts glorifying the leadership of the I.B. It also pained me as a Communist and as a former Guild member to watch the degrading behavior of our <em>Daily Worker</em> correspondents, first Joe North, later Edwin Rolfe, how they fawned on the representatives of the "capitalist press," currying their favor; the way they pleaded obsequiously with their every gesture, every act: please accept us as legitimate newspapermen, pretend to believe that the <em>Daily Worker</em> is a regular newspaper, not just a Communist propaganda sheet. They reminded me of whores at a block party—they had just as much right to be there as anybody else—after all, it was their own block giving the party—trying to erase the stamp WHORE by rubbing up to the respectable housewives.

I spent most of my free time in what was officially called "cementing our ties with the Spanish population." I found the Spanish most <em>simpático</em>, I delighted in their unspoiled simplicity, in their human dignity, and admired the fortitude with which they bore their wretched existence. Once, while leading a delegations from the Brigade to the U.G.T (<em>Union General de Trabajadores</em>) in Barcelona to invite them to our May 1st celebration, it suddenly occurred to me that we had hundreds of recruits belonging to the C.N.T., the Anarchist Syndicalist Union, who had rather the worst of it in that Communist brigade, and I decided to invite some anarchist leaders also. In scanning the list of Anarchist organizations I came across the name <em>Mujeres Libres</em> ("Free Women"), which sent the blood coursing through my veins.

Visions of Emma Goldman, the uninhibited behavior of the girls I had known in Greenwich Village, the easy promiscuity of the female comrades in the Party in New York dashed through my mind; inviting Anarchists was surely a brilliant idea. These women were actually Anarchists and openly called themselves free. God, what a May 1st celebration that would make for the Brigade if I could induce them to come.

I located their office. The <em>Mujeres Libre</em>: had an entire floor to themselves. This is a big organization, this is indeed marvelous, I exulted, and forgot all about my creaky knee joints and enlarged heart as I went bounding up those high Spanish steps. The girls in the office were young and pretty, the General Secretary of the organization was petite and beautiful. Her straight jet-black hair was combed severely back, emphasizing her enchanting classical features, her deep brown eyes shone like liquid pools, her olive skin was tantalizingly smooth. She received me with grave dignity and with evident reserve. She couldn't see how they could accept that invitation—in her experience the Internationals were mostly Communists and definitely hostile to the Anarchists. To break down that prejudice I first told her about my own personal interest in learning about Anarchism, then explained that American Communists were altogether different from other Communists; that it was in the American tradition to like Free Woman as well as, if not more than, all other kinds combined; and finally guaranteed that all volunteers in the brigade, regardless of receive them with open arms in a true united front spirit.

She was twenty-six, unmarried, and lived alone in her apartment. To make sure of their participation in that May Day celebration I intended to work on the Secretary General further that evening and invited her for dinner. At first she refused, claiming she had to go home to clean up her apartment and attend an important meeting that night. Her ultimate decision to skip both the meeting and the housecleaning was a political one. I was so eager to learn about Anarchism at first hand that I appeared a likely convert—if given sufficient personal attention. I did learn many facts about Anarchism, the Anarchist movement in Spain, and about the plight of the Spanish women in particular, first over dinner, later sitting on a park bench in the Rambla. I suggested I could learn easier when not distracted by people parading up and down in front of us, say in her apartment, or in my room in the hotel, but the night was balmy and she enjoyed gazing at the stars. The stars were beautiful indeed although that was no time for such foolishness.

At last, to my delight, she sighed and said it was time we went home and we walked arm in arm blissfully for a good hour until we reached her apartment. At the door she pulled free, gave me the Anarchist salute, then bade me good-night. I pleaded earnestly there were still some points about Anarchists I wanted clarified; she countered gravely I had learned enough for one night, more than any <em>extranjero</em>. I couldn't very well dispute that, yet I did fervently but it was of no avail; she gave me no chance to learn the one fact about Anarchist women which to me seemed of the utmost urgency at the moment. Edifying as that evening was from the political point of view it still fell vexingly short of my expectations.

The <em>Mujeres Libres</em> kept their word. A busload of them, young and gloriously beautiful to our starved eyes, came to visit us that May Day and there was great rejoicing.

Those Anarchist girls were the friendliest lot, but it soon transpired all they were interested in was talking politics. Only Captain Hernández, alone in the entire brigade, managed to get one of them to go for a stroll to a far-off olive grove to continue their discussion there. His success was due to the fact that he was comparatively apolitical and as such he had discovered that his girl was also nonpolitical, that she was not a member of the <em>Mujeres Libra</em>, only her sister was; that she had come along for the ride and not to make converts.

This concludes the chronicle of my lamentable failure "to cement" over and above the call of duty "our relationship" with the Spanish civilians. Those Anarchist women, although far more provoking in appearance, were no more interested in sex than their politically minded sisters here in America in the League of Women Voters.

If that's damning with faint praise, I stand mute.
