---
title: Chapter 29
---

Taking a Pullman to Canada instead of a coach as was expected from a Party functionary, was my own idea. It proved to have been a sound one even though the difference came out of my own pocketbook. I had no difficulty at the border. When the Canadian immigration officials woke me before dawn, the winter sky—gray and streaked with smoke from the engine—appeared grim, inhospitable and forbidding. I was sleepy and yawned—they asked very few questions. All they were interested in was how long I intended to stay, was I an American citizen, and how much money I had.

I replied I intended to stay a few months, was a naturalized citizen, and had enough money for my needs. They did not ask me to show them my citizenship papers but they wanted to see my money. It was then December, 1929. Unemployment was steadily increasing and although no one as yet suspected that unemployment would soon rise to crisis proportions, officialdom was already worrying. Before my departure I had closed out my checking account and had a thousand dollars in travelers checks and a few hundred dollars in cash on me. I showed them that, which ended the inspection.

I entered legally, had answered all questions truthfully, violated no law.

When a few months later the drive to deport alien Communists from Canada panicked quite a few comrades, the consciousness that I hadn't violated any law enabled me to stand my post calmly without the furtiveness which draws suspicion and leads to denunciation. Nor was I molested.

I reached my destination, Hamilton in Ontario, early Friday morning. No one met me at the station. I left my trunk in the baggage room and took a taxi to the editorial offices of the <em>Kanadai Magyar Munkas</em> (Hungarian Canadian Worker). The taxi took me to a side street in the working class section and stopped in front of a residential building. I was apprehensive that the driver had stopped at the wrong address but I did not want to arouse his suspicions and got out. There seemed to be no life in the house, even the street looked deserted. I was about to walk up the stoop when I discovered an open concrete stairway leading to the basement. I walked down to inquire from the janitor, or whoever would be there. The steps led to a door with a glass panel over which a window shade had been drawn. Tacked on the door was a printed news strip yellowed with exposure, the masthead of the <em>Kanadai Magyar Munkas</em> (from here on to be referred to as <em>Worker</em> to make it easier for the reader).

I tried the door, it was locked. I somehow sensed there was life behind and knocked. The door was soon opened by a sleepy-eyed man in his shirtsleeves who had evidently been sleeping on the leather couch under the window. He was rubbing his eyes and for some reason looked embarrassed. I asked him where Comrade Lustig lived—I cannot now recall the party name he used in Canada.

The man didn't know but said Lustig usually came in around ten. He then asked me whether I was the new comrade they were expecting. When I told him I was he started to apologize for sleeping in the office; he had been dispossessed and he hoped to be taken in soon by some of his buddies.

The editorial office of the <em>Worker</em>, for that's what that basement was, had only one window the top of which was level with the sidewalk, affording no other view than an occasional dog or the legs of the passers-by. It was lighted by two large unshaded electric bulbs; whitewash on the damp walls was flaky and green in patches. The center of the room was taken up by a crudely nailed, twelve foot table with two benches made of unpainted, roughly planed fir. That, with the leather couch, some crude shelving made of discarded orange crates, and a number of folding chairs, comprised all the furniture. There was no desk, typewriter, filing cabinet—there was nothing in that room to indicate even remotely that it was an editorial office except perhaps the disarranged pile of <em>Workers</em> stacked in one corner.

I tucked a copy of the <em>Worker</em> in my pocket and told the comrade I was going out for a walk and breakfast; if Lustig arrived before I returned let him wait for me.

Hamilton was the second-largest city after Toronto in the province of Ontario, with a population of a little over 150,000 in 1929, a drab industrial town. As I walked down one dreary street after another shivering under the icy blasts of the arctic Canadian winter winds, my spirit sank. This was proletarian life all right, the life I had chosen, but now that I was face to face with it, I felt myself shrinking inside. I was both angry with me and feeling sorry for myself. I thought of Lee and Swannee, of Helen and Ruth, of my snug apartment with my collection of records and the oversize bed. What the hell was I doing here in a basement in Canada, messing around with the proletariat! I cursed myself for a romantic fool as I walked into a lunchroom, glowering over the <em>Worker</em> as I waited for my order.

The <em>Worker</em> was a lousy sheet, full of typographical errors; it consisted entirely of reprints clipped from the <em>Uj Elore</em> and from Hungarian publications in Moscow and Paris. The only items identifying it as a Canadian publication were a few puffs about bazaars and affairs for the benefit of the <em>Worker</em>. Comrade Lustig hadn't exerted himself in editing that paper, that was sure.

The lunchroom was agreeably warm, the hotcakes were fluffy, the bacon crisp, and the coffee strong—emotion was receding before reason. The life of a pioneer was always one of hardship, the fathers of the American Revolution did not whore away their time in bed. History was not made by weak sybarites. What the hell was I bitching about? I had to be ready to make sacrifices. The sun was also coming out; feebly as it shone, it still radiated light and heat. As I retraced my steps to the <em>Worker</em> I was definitely in a confident mood.

I entered without knocking this time. The room was crowded and the air was hazy with tobacco smoke. My nose was assailed by a heavy sourish smell, a mixture of dried sweat from unwashed bodies, seldom changed underwear and dirty socks, the reek of old boots and the only suit that is being lived in, the penetrating odor of garlic mingled with cheap hair oil—the "peasant smell" they called it in Hungary. It was the universal smell of the poor that always hits you when you enter the cramped quarters of the underprivileged—whether in a Mission House or a tenement—the smell of humans who are overcrowded, who have neither the sanitary facilities nor the necessary change of clothes to keep themselves fresh and clean. Poverty stinks everywhere, and so do the poor.

I paused inside the door to get my bearings. I saw Lustig there surrounded by a crowd of men with typical Hungarian faces. Lustig greeted me with a handshake and with what almost passed for a smile of welcome—that was about the friendliest he had ever acted toward me. He then introduced me to the comrades as Kalman Lakatos, my party name in Canada. He did not introduce them to me individually and I felt like a man visiting distant relatives for the first time, who is being slyly appraised by all, and who in turn is trying to puzzle out what his relationship to each may be.

The comrades were deferential in a friendly way, they asked me questions, primarily about the <em>UJ Elore</em>, but also about the Hungarian movement in America in general. I was able to answer the first but had to parry the second because I was fairly ignorant about the movement outside New York. Luckily, as their questions showed, they weren't much better informed either and I passed the test.

About a half hour later Lustig pulled out his watch and announced he had to leave at once if he were to catch the train back to New York.

This was contrary to what I had been told to expect. Lustig was supposed to stay with me for at least two weeks until I became familiar with my duties. More important still, he was to take me to the Central Committee of the Canadian Communist Party and ask them to provide me with close guidance and (this is what Mayer emphasized most) with a subsidy for the <em>Worker</em> from the secret press funds of the Comintern. Now Lustig was pulling out, leaving me stranded like a blind owl in a strange belfry.

"Just a minute, Comrade Lustig. You haven't told me a thing about the paper, you haven't taken me to the print shop, I am not even acquainted with these comrades here. There are many problems we will have to discuss before you leave." I kept my voice low and tried to keep the edge out of it, but we were in an open room, all present had heard me, and now they faced us in silence. It looked like the beginning of a row and they were all aware of it, Lustig particularly so. He did not reply to me directly, he addressed us at large.

"Comrade Lakatos does not know the great organizational progress we have achieved during my short stay here. I am proud of the Canadian Hungarian movement!" He said that with a flourish and flashed us a wide oratorical smile which, I noticed, met with feeble response. Then turning to me, he related how he had reorganized the entire movement, how well the Canadian Hungarian Bureau was now functioning, how he had appointed Comrade Kovacs, a slender young man of about twenty-four, a tool and die maker apprentice, business manager of the <em>Worker</em>. He further informed me that there was more than enough copy in the hands of the printer for the next issue, leaving me a full week to get acquainted.

Next he turned to Kovacs and asked him how much money the <em>Worker</em> had. Kovacs emptied his pockets, counted the contents including the small change, and announced it was twenty-nine dollars and some pennies. Lustig then took twenty-five dollars out of that pile to pay for his room and his fare back to New York, shook hands with everyone there, including me, and left. Dismayed as I was, I couldn't help noticing that there was a singular lack of warmth in those handshakes, that not a single comrade bothered to see him to the door.

The next afternoon, I stopped at the print shop and found Lustig had misinformed me. Far from having an abundance of copy, the next issue of the <em>Worker</em> was two full pages short.

A Bureau meeting had been scheduled for that night in the <em>Worker</em>'s office. Twelve comrades were present and while I was waiting for them to open the meeting I occupied myself writing copy, all-Canadian news for a change, clipped from the Toronto papers. Finally I asked them why they delayed calling the meeting to order. A short discussion made it clear they expected me to do that, the comrade sent in from the States had always been the Secretary of the Bureau and the leader of the Canadian Hungarian movement.

The following night I attended a meeting of the Workers Singing Society; I wanted to see how one of our mass organizations functioned. Out of the fourteen singers in that chorus, eleven were familiar to me-they were the members of the Bureau.

The next night I went to the meeting of the Workers Dramatic Club. I found nine actors there, all of them members of the Bureau.

I was also asked to attend the meeting of the International Labor Defense but by then I was suspicious enough to ask who the members were. My hunch proved correct. They also had a Hungarian branch of the Workers International Relief organized—all Bureau members. The comrades were also talking about organizing a Workers Soccer Football Club—they had just the right number of prospects for it—eleven members of the Bureau for the team and the twelfth member for a substitute. Those comrades were certainly well organized.

At that time I blamed Lustig for the situation. It did not take me long to learn that this was typical Communist organizational practice. Many Communist organizations existed only on paper, their active membership consisted of the same pitifully small number of party members. This explains why the same names keep turning up on dozens of membership rolls on the list of designated subversive organizations.

In less than two weeks I had to face up to the truth—there was no Hungarian workers movement in Canada except in a very loose sense. The movement was actually in its infancy and it fell on me to chart its course, although I myself lacked previous organizational experience. As it happened, this ignorance proved more of an asset than a handicap; it enabled me to develop my own methods along pragmatic lines and they worked out far better than those of Lustig's mechanical party procedures.
